# Release notes
 
 ## 5.0.3
 This is a minor release containing a bug fix.  

 * Bug fix for incorrect global attributes in output NetCDF file.  

 ## 5.0.2
 This is a minor release containing a bug fix.

 * Bug fix for incorrect subroutine argument usage in mo_agg_isa.f90.  

 ## 5.0.1
 This is a minor release fixing a few bugs and some documentation.

 * Bug fix to remove too many characters in write statement (mo_logging.f90)
 * Bug fix for unitialized variable ntiles_globcover (mo_landuse_routines.f90, extpar_consistency_check.f90, and extpar_landuse_to_buffer.f90)
 * Remove unnecessary libraries in Options.daint
 * Fix typos in README.compile_run

 ## 5.0
 This release represents a merge of the Extpar official version 4.0 code with the DWD-Extpar version 2.10. 

 #### Build Mechanism

 * Added Options file for compiling on LCE with Intel compiler
 * Added Options files for compiling on Mistral with GCC, NAG, and Intel compilers
 * Added Options files for compiling on Mac OS with the GCC compiler
 * Updated Options file for compiling on o3 at ETH with PGI compiler
 * Update bin/gen_info.sh for compatibility with git

 #### Run scripts

 * Minor adaptations to run scripts to be compatible with new version
 * Addition of MPI ICON run script

 #### Testing

 * Addition of cosmo-dwd and icon tests to testsuite.
 * Update of Jenkins build and test scripts.
 * Add testsuite run scripts for mpi and dwd on mistral.
 * Update of testsuite references.

 ### Code changes

 #### Albedo calculation:
 * Added bin/cdo2alb-buffer.py and extpar_alb_to_buffer.sh to replace slow and incorrect albedo calculation for high resolution ICON model grids

 #### Topography calculation:
 * Added namelist parameter: lsubtract mean_slope
 * Move mo_agg_topo to mo_agg_topo_icon and mo_agg_topo_cosmo
 * Bug fix in mo_topo_sso- changes results of sso_sigma slightly
 
 #### Soil calculation:
 * Additional HWSD calculation for deep soil
 
 #### NDVI calculation:
 * Added bin/cdo2ndvi-buffer.py and extpar_ndvi_to_buffer.sh to replace slow and incorrect NDVI calculation for high resolution ICON model grids
 
 #### Climatological 2M temperature calculation:
 * Added bin/cdo2t_cl-buffer.py and extpar_cru_to_buffer.sh to replace slow and incorrect TCLIM calculation for high resolution ICON model grids
 * Added namelist parameter: ltcl_merge
 
 #### Flake calculation:
 * Added namelist parameter: lflake_correction.
 
 #### Consistency check:
 * [Changes results] Included lower limit for roughness length
 * ERA-I SST and T2M temperature for ICON model

 #### Grib output NOT supported

 #### GME model NOT supported

 ### Changes in Results
  Due to the large amount of changes in the code in this release, there are many differences in the resulting external parameter fields generated by the release 5.0 code compared to the fields generated by older Extpar codes.  The only code change in this release that deliberately changed the results was the addition of a lower limit for roughness length, which is 1e-6.  Otherwise, any changes in results that can be seen came directly from bug fixes to the code, and as such most of them are small and are not expected to change results in the COSMO or ICON model runs.  Some of these changes in results are examined in the next two sections.  

 #### Extpar version 4.0 to Extpar version 5.0
  The technical testsuite in Extpar was used to compare the external parameter fields from Version 4.0 and Version 5.0 for three different MeteoSwiss operational setups for COSMO and a climate setup for COSMO-CLM.  

 ##### COSMO 7, globe topography input
  For the COSMO7 MCH setup using the globe topography data set, changes in the results smaller than 1e-6 can be seen for several variables, including the aerosol variables, albedo variables, HORIZON, and SSO_SIGMA.  Larger changes on the order of 3 degrees can be seen in the SSO_THETA variable;  these are due to a bug fix in this release, and are expected.  Finally, roughness length is different as well due to the introduction of the lower limit value of 1e-6.  

 ##### COSMO 7, aster topography input
  For the COSMO7 MCH setup using  the aster topography data set, the changes in the results are less than 5e-7, and occur in the aerosol, HORIZON, and SSO_SIGMA variables.  

 ##### COSMO 1, aster topography input
  For the COSMO1 MCH setup using the aster topography data set, the changes in the results are less than 4e-5, and occur in the aerosol, HORIZON, SKYVIEW, and T_CL variables.  

 ##### COSMO-CM climate setup
  For the COSMO-CLM climate setup using the globe topography data set, changes in results smaller than 3e-8 can be seen in the SSO_SIGMA and SSO_STDH variables.  Larger changes on the order of 3 degrees can be seen in the SSO_THETA variable;  these are due to a bug fix in this release, and are expected.  Due to another bug fix, the ALB_SAT and ALB_DRY variables have changed results on the order of .2.  Finally, roughness length is different as well due to the introduction of the lower limit value of 1e-6.  

 #### DWD Extpar version 2.10 to Extpar version 5.0
  Comparisons of the COSMO D2 setup used operationally by DWD were carried out to compare the current operational Extpar code (DWD version 2.10) with the new release 5.0.  This comparison showed no significant differences in the generated external parameter fields.  Get more details of this comparison [here](doc/EXTPAR_CD2_comparison.pdf)
